Hey, all. Nicolas, Fabio, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Hi. How are you, Michael?
>> Doing well. I think I should say welcome back. I've been on the show a couple of times
for various things. Most recently, other than this, also about PyScript and
MicroPython, which we'll touch a little bit on as well. But, yeah, excited to have you both
We're excited as always to be talking about PyScripts.
One day I can just, I feel it.
We're gonna be living the dream.
Python in the browser.
It's gonna be fantastic.
Let's do it.
- Hope so.
Let's hope, yes.
- I mean, is the dream real now?
That's kind of part of the question.
And we'll see how it's to some degree real
and you all are making great progress on that.
- Spoiler alert, that's the thing.
(laughing)
- Yeah.
Nicholas and I are laughing for a reason too,
which we can't wait to talk about it.
So that's gonna be good.
- Yeah, yeah, good.
Well, we can't wait to hear about it.
But before we do, like I said,
you both have been on the show for a couple of reasons,
a couple of episodes previously,
but quick introductions for folks
that don't necessarily know you.
- You wanna start, Nicholas?
- Okay, I'll go first.
I'm Nicholas, I'm a principal engineer
on the PyScript team at Anaconda.
And my passion is Python and education,
which is one of the other reasons
why I was on the show earlier.
And I've also been involved in all sorts
of different aspects of the Python community as well.
And other interesting things like,
Oh, have I got one? I think I have
Uh pbc micro bit was something that I was involved in and
Yeah
Stuff like that. So yeah, that's me. But right now i'm doing pi script
And I am joined by my esteemed colleague fabio
Thank you, nicholas, um
Uh, well as you can tell I work with nicholas at anaconda, you know creator of pi script.
been in the community for a long time as well.
Probably that's not focused on numbers or years.
But I'm very interested in, just like Nikolaas, Python for
education as well and the whole community aspect of it
which is mostly why I am here, I would say.
And so I've been involved in a lot of community things,
was chairman of EuroPython for, I think, five, six years.
Then, you know, chair of Python Italy,
co-founder of Python Italia, et cetera. Always loved
the community aspect of Python. But yeah, and happy to be here for
having us. Yeah, it's great to have you as always.
You both mentioned having an interest or background or both
in education.
And Nicholas, I think probably the high watermark
is probably the BBC micro bit, which
touched the lives of more students
than almost any other regular school teacher
by a massive, massive margin-- millions of kids.
That's amazing.
But I think another angle here, teaching people
to work with Python and getting them started in programming,
going from I have this idea or I've learned what I got to do in programming until I can
make it happen on a machine that is not set up for programming necessarily.
That gap is pretty far with Python.
It's pretty far with most languages, right?
Like you want to do Ruby, probably got to set up some kind of Ruby thing.
You want to do Java, a bunch of stuff there, right?
But being able to do it in your browser or something you just open a page and run it
Like, there's this educational empowering aspect to it.
Yeah, absolutely.
And you wouldn't believe the interesting situations
that teachers have to work in at school.
And locked down computers and things like that,
where their sysadmins won't install Python or any other kind
of programming language, despite here in the UK
and all over the US, programming being part of the curriculum.
It's mandated in the national curriculum here and I was in a call yesterday with someone who just told me that
The norwegians have now got programming mandatory in their national curriculum. and nobody seems to have told the school admins this
Um, so what's the piece of software that was running on everybody's computer in the school? It's a browser
So I see where this conversation is going
Wouldn't it be great if you had python that ran in the browser? It would solve all your installation problems if you're an educator
Yeah
I mean, how much of JavaScript's rise to fame and continued, not quite dominance, but almost
certainly in the front end side dominance has to do just with the fact that it's possible?
Yes, yes, totally.
It's not necessarily the best, it's not necessarily what people want, at least not in the early days,
but it's possible. And, and that says a lot, I think.
I think
You know javascript
Has lots of really. Um
Wonderful aspects to it. I've been using javascript for almost 20 years
But it's certainly not
A beginner friendly language. I think you could say that with some confidence. You could try teaching it to beginners
but with all the coercion rules and
uh gotchas that that
Makes sense if you understand javascript, but it's quite a journey to get you to that understanding
um with all of that, it's
It's very it's hard enough just to sort of concentrate on getting hello world working and things like that
Just a simple proof of concept to show that your development environment is is working
but if the language that you're using is
The equivalent of trying to teach a five-year-old beginner violinist with a stradivarius
Um, you know, they're not gonna kind of get it. Okay, you give them
You give them an instrument that helps them take the first steps into programming and python as a programming language
And this is at the core of of nito's
Mission at the very beginning abc the language that he based it off was a teaching language
So education and learning and teaching and making sure that python is teachable
Is is a is a part of the dna, which is it is it's been around since 1989
I guess you put it that way, hasn't it?
- Yeah.
- That is a striking difference, honestly,
between Python and almost all languages today, right?
Like why Basic was super popular,
why JavaScript is super popular, et cetera,
because it's your only option, right?
And it's the thing, or if not,
it's the thing that you have right away there,
already installed for you.
And you don't have to go through the pain
of trying to download things,
install on your system and whatnot.
Python, on the contrary, it's very interesting.
It's the most popular language, but it's
because people in specific domain areas
chose Python because it was the easiest and the most expressive
and tailored for education.
And then it started competing with very specific languages
that were born to do specific things.
Like R is another example.
Like R was born with that goal.
and that's why it's so good at it.
Python just happens to be very easy to understand.
So data scientists and people adopt it, which is great.
Python actually, just to close,
Python actually is the most popular language,
but it has a horrible story for mobile
and browser and tablets,
the most popular hardware and software on earth, right?
And it's still the most popular, which is mind blowing.
Yeah, yeah, I think what it would be if it were good on both right? Yeah quite but what you say Fabio it reminds me of
Who is it a keynote? uh
Maybe the pre-covid uh keynote at pycon us
Where I think one of the keynotes said python is the world's best second best language
And I think that's kind of the essence of what what you've just said r is great for doing stats and maths and things
But so is python
You know, it might not be up there with R
for very specialist niche mathematical things,
but Python's good enough.
And because it's easy to learn,
folks are gonna go fly with that.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I think, building on what you said, Fabio,
I think one of the really unique aspects of Python,
you know, compare this to like Visual Basic
or the super simple programming languages
like Scratch or the super high-end ones
like C++ and Rust, Python is a full spectrum language.
You can start really easy with a super partial understanding.
You don't even know what classes are,
but you can put six lines together
and you can do cool stuff.
That's like Scratch and Basic and stuff.
But those languages run out of real programming ideas
really soon where you can just keep growing into Python
till you get to the C++ and Rust style.
Conversely, if you want to start with C++ or Rust,
you don't want to teach a beginner what avoid *** is.
You know, like that's down the road,
but you'll hit with that kind of stuff soon.
So I think that that's a little bit of its magic as well.
And what you all are doing to bring that magic
to the front end of the web world
and kind of through the transitive property a little bit
through progressive web apps
to things that run in really good ways
on mobile and tablet as well.
It really unlocks a lot and I'm super excited for it.
So I know I've had you on before to talk about this,
but I'm sure there's some folks out there like,
this sounds amazing.
What is this angle bracket Python pi-script in my HTML?
What is this pi-script stuff?
Tell us about it.
Cool, let me give you a one minute TL;DR.
So basically, PyScript is a platform
that allows users to create applications
or frameworks on top of it,
and supports Python as a language.
And it basically uses the browser as technology
as its vector, right?
It treats the browser as almost like a virtual machine
they can move around.
And then because of the current stack around WASM,
web assembly on the browser technology,
we are now able to run Python inside,
you know, either WASI or MScripten,
which are just implementations of web assembly
on the browser.
And PyScript sits on top of interpreters.
So you have the browser, web assembly,
Mscript and Uruwazi, and then a Python implementation,
Pyodide or MicroPython or other things like this.
And PyScript goes on top by providing a friendly interface,
higher level APIs that are, you know,
Pythonic and friendly, allows extensibility with plugins
and things like this to create an ecosystem.
And basically what we wanna do is reuse the ecosystem.
As much as we can, we don't wanna reinvent anything.
Actually, that's one of the things that I'm most proud of it during this first year,
which is I think we made really good progress in helping other projects that are developing
and making Python happen on the browser.
So, long story short, PyScript allows you through those tags, PyScript or PyConfig or PyRapple,
to define what's my environment,
what packages I want to install and whatnot.
And then with the PyScript script,
you can define scripts that run your application
and then just use it.
You don't need to install anything,
to download anything, it just works on the browser.
- Yeah.
Excellent. I think maybe let me just give one more piece,
one more resource for folks out there
who might be interested.
Have you all seen the birth and death of JavaScript by Gabriel?
All right.
[LAUGHTER]
It's easy.
I was there when he gave it.
Oh my gosh.
What was the crowd's reaction like?
Oh, we were just strolling around laughing.
It was great.
It was great delivery.
Yeah.
So this is a, let's see, 15 minute, 30 minute presentation
he gave at PyCon 2014.
So quite, quite outdated in web technology evolution speed.
But I throw this out there because it's
both an amazing comedy skit, but also super,
super nice buildup of how you got to places like now
with Emscripten and WebAssembly,
and how do you take C code like CPython
and run it on top of the browser on the front end.
So people are interested, they can, you know,
they are like, what is all this magic?
You can have both a really good laugh and watch that.
That was good.
So with PyScript, you can write, just like in JavaScript,
you can write JavaScript, or in this case, Python,
in the browser, right?
Like you could just, like you could say,
angle bracket JavaScript,
and just start writing JavaScript code.
Here you can say, Py-script,
and then you can say print, you know,
hello from Python or whatever, and it'll run,
but you can also have more well-structured applications, right?
-Yes. -I'm thinking I might even lean so far
saying you should have more well-structured applications.
-Yes. -What do you all think?
We're going to take this one, Nicholas.
You want to take it? Yeah, go for it.
Oh, I was asking if you wanted to take it.
Oh, right. Sorry, I misheard.
Yeah.
Yes, I don't want to hear this.
It is the short answer.
Who doesn't want well-structured applications?
[LAUGHTER]
I'll take this one.
Okay, go for it.
One thing about PyScript and that we are actually trying to work a lot on it,
about it, is that it gives a lot of freedom, as you said.
You can put tags in there. It's just HTML.
So everything you have access to in an HTML page,
you should have access to WinFileScript as well.
So like your tags in the page, your scripts,
if you loaded anything in your JavaScript scope,
you can import those things in FileScript and say,
from JavaScript, import this and this is run.
Actually, one of the things that we're working right now
is actually going to explore that even more.
And we're going to demo later.
We have currently a next branch where we are redesigning the core of Firescript and making it
smaller, fully web-based, fixing most of the bugs and the very crappy code that I wrote at the
beginning. And we had an amazing addition to the team from Andrea who's been in tech and on the
the web for a lifetime.
And he's amazing.
And he's bringing that aspect that we lacked in the team.
Web-native point of view.
Well, Pythonists and Python geeks, so we missed that.
So now we're going to allow also execution in workers
or blocking calls.
Or actually, we support other languages as well.
We have demos with Lua or Ruby and things like this.
And I think that's part of the vision
where we want a PyScript to be a tool that allows you
to almost do anything with any language and deploy anywhere.
It's beyond Python.
Even if Python is the primary citizen there,
we want to make sure that we are unlocking everything for all the users.
>> I'm sure it is.
Do you see an analogy with like Jupyter going from IPython notebooks
to Jupyter notebooks and starting to bring on a little,
a broader view of the ecosystem, but still kind of being Python at heart?
Yeah, I think so.
I think in a different way than Jupyter.
Jupyter has always been very self-contained into the notebook itself
and the programming paradigm that the notebook brings with it.
It's an exploration tool rather than an editor-authoring tool.
And then with Drupal Lab, it evolved in different things as well.
I think PyScript has maybe the opposite problem.
We're too open, which is hard for actually our core user base that we want to...
We said PyScript is for the 99%, right?
And we need to do a lot of hard work to make it happen.
Nicholas.
- So this is a really great point that Fabio is making.
And you've got to remember the key word here
is that PyScript is a platform.
Now it's a platform, you know,
the layers of that platform were articulated by Fabio.
You know, at the bottom is WebAssembly,
which runs in your browser and you can compile,
you know, Emscripten or, you know,
other things can sort of work on top of that
and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
and then you get PyScript, okay.
So with PyScript, we hope,
and we're doing this ourselves,
to build frameworks on top of that.
So what's the difference between a framework and a platform?
If a platform is like the foundational stuff
that gives you the core verbs and nouns and things, okay,
the framework is perhaps focused on a particular problem
that you're trying to solve,
like in the classic Python world,
Django and Flask are web frameworks.
Okay, you have a map.lib is a kind of like a framework
for creating graphs and things like that.
And so we expect people to reuse some of these things
'cause this is another aspect of having Python
in the browser is that you also bring the whole
of the Python ecosystem into the browser as well.
And all the modules and the things like that
that Python brings.
So we hope, and we're building this sort of stuff,
and we'll probably come on to that
later in this conversation,
but we hope the community,
'cause this is an open source project as well,
let's not forget, the community come along
and they start building cool things
on top of PyScript frameworks and applications and things.
So that they surprise us and delight us and make us go,
And this is one of the ways that I would measure our success
is that if somebody turns up and goes,
"I built this thing."
And I go, "Oh man, I never thought anyone would do that
"with PyScripts."
If you see what I mean.
When we get to that, then I know we're rocking.
- Yeah, you've queued up a nice comment
from the audience here.
Sarah says, "I'm exploring Vue.js.
"Shall I wait and use PyScript in my app?"
Great question.
[LAUGHTER]
I think we're coming close to a world
where the two play well together,
actually very well together.
Yeah.
We'll talk later about PyScript.com,
which is an additional thing on top of PyScript.
And we're using Vue there too.
Vue is a great tool for building front-end apps and whatnot.
But I hope yeah, I hope in the future. We will have view written python or something similar, which is more pythonic
so here's the thing for sarah to understand is that
Because python's in the browser it has access to
The javascript context so you could start to mix and match, you know
You've got view stuff happening in javascript and you've got python stuff that could be working. Um
In concert with it as well, you know mix it up a bit. Uh
I don't know. This is an early part of the journey.
Sarah, you go away and check this out and tell us what you find.
Knock yourself out. Explore.
- Yeah. - Absolutely.
I'll keep repeating this. Anyone that has questions
or specific use cases or want to contribute, reach out.
We want to hear from you and we are very welcoming.
And so come be a contributor.
Super. Yeah, and just shout out to Anaconda, Anaconda Inc.
for making this possible for you all to be working on this
in a more dedicated way instead of just,
I'm really passionate and I've got an hour a day
I can spend on it, but like legitimately,
you can be more responsive
and put yourself a little more out there
because it's not like it,
it takes away from that one hour you could add features with.
- Agree, yeah.
I will say like we're very lucky
and very thankful to Anaconda to support this.
It's a huge effort, so yeah.
- Yeah, I would add one more possibility out there
for folks in Sarah's situation.
I would love to see PyView or something
like really ready to work with it.
And I know the MicroPython work I'm about to ask you,
just about to ask you all about for a follow-up on
makes that really a possible case.
But if you're really just like,
it's gotta be some JavaScript framework,
Give HTMX a look.
It's really, really nice that you can just keep writing Python.
You got to do it on the server, and it's kind of a little async type of thing,
but that's how a lot of the view stuff happens anyway.
So if PyScript weren't the answer, maybe consider HTMX before you decide
like it's all front end and React and just a bunch of APIs.
That's really nice stuff.
All right.
Back to pi script
What's the story of the micropython thing that we spoke about last time
Okay, so, let's just recap what happened last time was I think i've just finished doing the proof of concept and we had
Micropython kind of running. Okay. Um
and that was
That was late last year, wasn't it? And you said yeah, it was like six months ago or so. Yeah. Yeah
Yeah, if you can get yeah because we have brett on the call as well. I remember now. Um
If you can get micropython running by
The middle of next year it's going to be you know, the kind of hallelujah moment
You know the clouds will part the angels will sing and the sun will shine and all this sort of stuff
So cats and dogs living together all that. Yeah, exactly exactly sharks with lasers that sort of thing. so
And who wouldn't want that? Um
And so what's happened in the intervening six months, so I think um two important things have happened
the first one is the re-architecting of
pyscript and uh just to
re
You know reinforce what fabio said. Um
Maybe six months ago when we said pyscript is python in the browser. The emphasis was on
Python and not so much in the browser
Okay, because we've been joined, you know, our colleague andrea is very much of the web world
In fact his nickname inside the team is web yoda
Uh for a very good reason, okay. Um
uh, it's now you know python and we have in the browser has been kind of uh worked on and we've been looking at
How that sort of works and how these two sort of things mesh together?
um because andrea is is frankly
Incredible at this sort of stuff. Um
And he's kind of of the web and he knows the idioms and he knows the apis
And he knows how the browsers work and things like that. Um
The actual pi script core that's coming next is very small and very flexible. Okay, so that's the first sort of pillar of this
second pillar
It goes by the name of damien, uh who we all know and love in in melbourne. Um
And you know damien's a buddy. we worked on the micro bit together. That's how we first um got to know each other
and um
clearly, I don't think in a million years damien imagined that
Micropython would be running on a browser. That's completely the opposite end of the computing spectrum
But because micropython watch watch micropython become the most popular
Base to run python globally it easily could if it goes out on the web. Yeah. Yeah, exactly exactly
Exactly, exactly.
Now here's the thing,
because Pyodide is CPython compiled to WebAssembly.
We started with PyScript.
But depending on how you build it,
it's around 11 megabytes if you have the whole,
everything but the kitchen sink in there, okay?
That's a lot for a web page, okay?
I know everybody says the New York Times
is however many megabytes it is,
but still 11 megs is large.
And it doesn't play well with these black mirrors
that we carry around in our pockets.
MicroPython, I noticed today,
thanks to compression and other things,
it's down to 170K to deliver into the browser.
And with the 50 plus, 50 odd K
for the core of PyScript, the next thing,
we have an incredible, it's around half a megabyte
to get the thing into your browser,
which I think it was Simon Willis said,
that's smaller than some hero images you get on websites.
Okay, so you get a development environment.
So we reached out to Damian,
and Damian's been working with us,
and he's been doing an awful lot of work,
impeccable work, excellent work,
to make sure that the story of MicroPython in the browser
is that it's kind of like a first class Python, okay?
So he has implemented the FFI,
different function interface between Python and the JavaScript context.
Okay, it's the same sort of API as you get in Pyodide.
Okay, so it's familiar.
Okay, so you import JS, and then you're away.
Okay, you're, you're referencing things in the land of JavaScript.
He's also made sure...
To be clear for people listening, that means you can hook button click events, you can
- Yeah. - Ready, mouse,
like in Python. - Web APIs.
- Functions, yep. - I wanna play some audio.
There's an audio API built into the browser.
I can import JS and then do JS.audio
as a class to instantiate something to then play.
And it's just super easy and a real joy to use,
but it starts like that.
And this is, I think, the key aspect
key aspects of the difference between
MicroPython and Pydite, Pydite gives you all of Python.
Okay, so you wanna do some data science
or you wanna bring in some CPython module
to work in the browser, you use Pydite.
But if you want something Python-ish,
and it's fast, and it goes like the clappers,
and it's really quick to load,
then MicroPython is the thing for you.
If you want to start manipulating the DOM
and working with what the browser makes available to you.
And so, to answer Sarah's point,
maybe MicroPython is the thing that you should be using
to coordinate with that.
- I think certainly as an alternative to Vue, it would be.
Yeah.
- Yes.
I really wanna chime in one thing that,
just because I'm really proud of what we're doing there,
like what Niko's highlighted,
I think it's really great to see projects like MicroPython
coming together with Piodite and PyScript,
all talking, "Hey, how can we make things be,
share the best parts of each project
and have a common interface to interface JavaScript?
How can we make this happen?
How can we support MicroPython and PyScript?"
And so it was, I really need to thank
Damien, Hood, Roman, from those projects
to be so nice and so easy to work with.
and willing to just, yeah, let's talk about it,
let's see what's best for the community.
And yeah, great community work.
Yeah, it's absolute joy.
And I'll tell you a funny story.
Just after Christmas, we met up the PyScript team
in real life for the first time.
And because we were all in the same place
and we had Hood with us, Hood has since joined the team.
And because of time zones, we were all able to drop onto a call with Damien.
And having Hood and Damien talk together for the first time,
you'd think, you know, these are exceptionally gifted engineers.
OK. And after maybe, I don't know, two minutes of small talk,
they were talking about, I don't know,
the intricacies of garbage collection in the WebAssembly
context and you know the whole kind of conversation just went
exploded off into the technical
Sort of ether as it were. but what I want to highlight is that you know, uh
PyScript has sort of lit a fuse underneath
And these projects are working together and it's so wonderful to see the open source community working in the way that it should
You know people bringing the best themselves and being very humble
and listening and being compassionate to other people
when there are differences of opinion,
and there are always differences of opinion.
And I think one of the things that I take away from this project
is the amount of fun I have working on this.
That people pay me to do this is incredible.
So...
That's awesome. I love it.
We've kind of introduced the possibility
and what we can do with PyScript pretty well,
but I can't resist showing this video here.
So Nicholas you have a one-minute video which I'm going to link to that shows Python running in the browser
which is great and
Then very nicely you have it running on a mobile phone, which is
Really nice. Yeah, tell people where it runs next
in a car
So Tesla, it's basically a computer on wheels and it has a browser built-in. Oh
Yeah, this this Lucy Goosey app a colleague of mine, you know, clearly I'm British and she said to me
you've got to be Lucy Goosey about this she's from Boston and
What on earth is Lucy Goosey and she explained and since then I've been getting Lucy Goosey into all of these kind of places
Just pull a leg a little bit you click on the goose and it uses the underlying browsers
Audio API to go ha
Right, so it's just honking on demand and the fact that you can get a car to honk like a goose kind of seems
Kind of appropriate in a funny sort of way, but it's certainly for Tesla's. Yeah. Yeah, exactly
This is micropython running on the Tesla plane, I love it
- Yeah, so maybe the next thing that we could do here
is we could talk about, I think,
one of the bigger announcements that you had recently.
So there's probably two plus the shift in API
and the changes there.
But one, whoever wants to take this is pyscript.com.
- Yeah, I can talk real quick about it.
So, here's the beginning.
Part of the vision when we started was, okay, cool,
PyScript needs to be open source and everything always.
How can we make it, it's on the browser, right?
Like how can we make it even easier
for people to just hop in somewhere,
start a project and then just share it with others.
And that was, okay, we need a product
or something like this.
So we launched PyScript.com,
which is a free service or freemium service.
Right now, we actually, the only option for paid features
or anything like this is really just through being a founder,
which is basically in the Kickstarter model,
like you wanna support the project.
It really is what it is.
- And it's a little bit like a GitHub sponsor, kinda.
- Yes, yeah.
And we will always have a free tier
with unlimited projects, unlimited ways
you know, ways we can share it, etc.
And we're probably going to have paid features for things that we're paying
or things that make it worth, you know.
But we want to have a place where people can just drop a snippet
or a Python application then share with others.
Like one thing that was super clear to me recently
was after also the video of Nicolas,
was last keynote I gave in Colombia was,
"Hey, how many of you," I asked the question,
"How many of you think you can write a Hello World application
and then share with 30 people,
not technical, like your mom,
your family, and others,
and share with them within an hour?"
Hello World without complexity.
Then what? Ten people raised
their hands out of 450.
>> Yeah. It'll take a good chunk of that hour to do it.
>> Exactly.
>> Even for the ones who can do it.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. Or even worse,
like in a day,
not many more raise their hands.
The goal here is really you can just hop in,
click, start a new project.
It's conveniently already a Hello World application by default.
By default, it's shareable anywhere.
So all of a sudden you come from,
hey, I'm not sure I can deploy the simplest app
in the world to my audience and effectively
to it's just a matter of seconds.
I just need to share the link and then can see,
they can see on mobile and things like this,
which is, that's the striking thing,
that messaging that I think to me was clear
that we're not doing a good job, right?
Before PyScript, you could still deploy those things
on mobile with PyDi directly and stuff,
but it wasn't that easy.
Right now, that's the key to Python adoption,
Python in education, all of those use cases.
That's why I really beg everyone, talk about PyScript,
and that's the value, right?
Sharing and spreading Python all over.
- Yeah, let's look at one of these.
So if you create an account, you log in,
there's a trending and a featured set.
So one of these is tic-tac-toe and I'll view the site
then we can maybe talk about the code real quick.
So I pulled this up in my browser,
based on the Pyodied version.
And down here you can, it does show the terminal
just for people who are interested in the print statements,
but you can just go play tic-tac-toe on yourself
and you know, end up, you just click crazy,
I guess you'll win or something, right?
The O's win this time.
but it shows the JavaScript interaction,
the click down, the changing the DOM from Python,
all those good things, right?
- Yeah.
- And so you can go view the code for it.
Maybe just, we could use this as a chance
to just talk through a little bit of like
how you're structuring this,
'cause you've got a manifest, you've got a main.py,
you've got an index.html.
- Actually, so an important point,
If you go back to the app itself,
- Hold on, I'm getting us there.
There we go.
- If you look in the bottom right.
- Oh yeah, it says view code right there.
- Yeah.
Okay, so you come across an app
that's written with PyScript.com.
You wanna know how does it work?
You know, the classic view source,
the number of people who said I became a software engineer
because in the 90s, when I was a teenager,
I could right click view source and figure out what,
okay, that's that.
Okay, so I just wanted to highlight that that was there.
Anypyscript.com app, you'll be able to see the source.
- Excellent.
- And you can copy the project.
- Yeah, and you also have a copy.
Yeah, exactly, we're on the same page.
There's a copy of the project,
which has got like a clone this to my account
and I'll play with it, right?
- Yeah, yeah. - Yeah, exactly.
That's actually one thing that we've been struggling
with terminology, trying to,
do we use the usual geek terminology
or we use user-friendly, should we use copy or fork?
That's sort of the thing.
Yeah, anyway.
- Yep.
- Yes. - Nice.
Yeah, so tell people quickly about how,
what you can do with PyScript.com, kind of how it works.
It's a little bit like Repl.it,
but really Python focused, right?
- Yes, it's very similar to Repl.it or CodePen
and other services like these.
The idea is that you have your space
where you host your project.
We have an editor right now.
We're working also on creating views
that are more user-friendly,
and you don't need to know about HTML
or anything like this, just hop in.
But the nice thing about this is with any project,
you can just hop in, see the Python code,
how it was done, implemented, and playing around it.
And we always have the view of the files,
and then a preview with an iframe
that you can see your app while you develop and whatnot.
Yeah.
I can talk quickly about the geography of how the project is organized.
You have your index.html, which is the thing that is first served to the browser.
And if we go look at that, we'll see that in there, it's just referencing basically
all the other things.
And it's just plain old HTML in there as well.
So we've got PyScript being loaded as well.
We've got some CSS.
we've got the script, PyScript tag that tells us
that main.py is where the application
is gonna be run from.
And then we just have, you know,
the HTML code for displaying the user interface.
So if we hop over to manifest.json,
this is an old one.
- The others have a PyScript.toml, right?
- Yes, I was just gonna say,
it's usually a PyScript.toml file.
I can pull that up for us here.
- That's great.
In the Toml file, it's gonna be empty
'cause there's nothing there,
but this is where you start to define characteristics
of the environment in which this app is gonna run.
So you might say packages equals
and then a list of packages that you want installed
as if it were a requirements.txt file.
Okay.
- Give me a sense of what I can put in that list.
(laughing)
- Anything that is pure Python.
Anything that is pure Python.
- Almost everything.
- Yeah.
- There are complicated caveats, which we could go into.
- Yes.
Overall, the differentiator is really
if you're using anything that does multi-processing
or threading or sockets, right?
Like those on the browser don't really exist.
- Right.
I couldn't use PyMongo or PGE,
Psycho or requests per se,
because those are basically violating some...
- Yes. - Samboxing rule.
Yeah, yeah.
Requests specifically, there is a package that patches requests.
So you can actually...
It's called PyDite HTTP, I think.
And it basically just patches everything
From after you do that, then you can just import requests and use it normally. So it does work right now
Yeah, so the important thing is is that you remember that your tab
is
conceptually equivalent to your virtual
Okay, and so the pyscript.toml file is just the way pyscript learns about how do you want to configure your
Environment for for for this. Okay, and then if we look in main.py, um
There we go, it's the classic python, um
Uh, you know
This is where you start. This is where you just type your python code. Just go ahead. you know import js and then js.
Um, uh document dot whatever, you know to get yourself into the dom that sort of stuff. Um
Yeah, and from that moment, you have a link
that you can share with anyone, right?
Like, it just works.
Yeah, that's the power of it.
- Right, excellent.
So yeah, just got to share or copy it or whatever.
Okay, so this is a way for people to play with PyScript.
I saw here in the index that you specifically refer
to certain releases of PyScript here.
So I guess presumably it's kind of however much
you want to stay on the cutting edge of PyScript or kind of just
take some version in time and stick with it?
Yeah.
Yeah, that's actually a great question
because we've been discussing that a lot.
And hey, just we should actually--
should we remove latest and/or unstable?
Those are always linked to the latest stable release
and the latest merged commit in the repo.
And I think ultimately we're leaning towards yes
and always spin the version,
mostly because that guarantees that,
we're not gonna change things under the rug
for you and your app, just works.
- It's been curious to the user, isn't it?
I mean, we don't wanna do something that breaks their code.
Okay, so if you pin it to,
PyScript version 0.0.1 alpha one, you know,
from way back when dinosaurs ruled the world,
but your code still works.
It might not be the most up-to-date PyScript,
but it's your code.
It's your responsibility.
If you want to update the runtime,
you go knock yourself out.
- That's a good idea.
So that brings up a bit of a comment
from Toon Army out there who says,
so we're just about out of alpha.
Do not use in production, question mark.
- Yeah, that's a pretty good one.
(laughing)
- YOLO/latest, let's go.
- Exactly.
So even with very stable things,
I would always recommend pinning all the versions anyway.
Right, like, and even the secondary versions and whatnot.
Like when you deploy, pin the thing,
pin the thing down.
And that's what, with PyScript.com,
we're trying to basically put all those small details
baked in so that you don't need to think about those.
And just use best practices.
For instance, we are using PyConfig and PyScript
with source and not having code in line, right?
Because coding in line is great to get going,
but it's really hard to read.
Editors don't play well with it.
It's hard to test your code, all of this.
So we're saying, let's just use templates
that are encouraging best practices.
And pinning the versions is one of them.
Could I write unit tests?
Could I have a page that is like tests.html,
then import pytest?
I'd do that.
[INAUDIBLE]
--in the browser.
Yeah.
So OK, here's the thing.
And we've not mentioned PyPicard or Invent,
that we've renamed it.
But when I was writing that before,
or the kind of proof of concept before PyCon,
I had py test running in the browser. I mean, why wouldn't you run it in the browser? That's the context literally in which
This code is supposed to run. So let's run the test suite in the browser and it just works. It's lovely. Yeah
It'll be 10 minutes to go. Hmm. That'd be a good idea to actually seeing the thing. Um
A real kind of woohoo kind of fist pump moment
Yeah, that's fantastic. So, um speaking of you why don't you have it?
Yeah, I just want to mention one aspect, which is, we don't always think about this.
Because PyScript runs in your browser, in your clients, like, there's no server side logic or anything like this.
So scalability comes for free.
Like, you can scale that your Hello World app to a billion users and not notice because all the computation is going to run on their end.
which is another really cool aspect of the whole thing
that we don't give enough credit to it, but it's important.
- Yeah, it absolutely is.
Unless you have some kind of server sync type of thing,
there's just, there's no effort, right?
- Yeah.
- Other than delivering the WASM bits.
- All right, somewhere buried in here,
we have PiperCard, there we go.
- Okay.
So you point you had uh mentioned you were working on this tell us tell us about this nick
Okay, so, um peter when he announced
Uh pi script to the world at icon last year. He said this is going to be for the 99
And for that he meant that not developers. Okay, and i'm old enough because i'm
dinosaur, uh really in internet time, um
You were on the internet before the web existed.
I was, actually.
I remember getting NCSA Mosaic onto a 386 machine
in my computing lab at university and going,
oh my gosh, this is incredible.
It was mind-blowing.
That's the first graphical--
I can connect to NASA?
That's amazing.
Just in two minutes, I'll be able to download this picture.
It'll be so remarkable.
- Yeah, there was Archie, there was Gopher,
there was Telnet, there was that before the web.
- Okay, that's a whole different podcast
for old fellows who were on the web back in the day.
We should stop that now.
We're turning into the--
- The internet used to have a sound, Nicholas.
It had a sound.
- Yes, oh yes, yes.
Anyway, sorry, young people, anyone under the age of 40.
(laughing)
- All right, paper card.
But back then, when dinosaurs ruled the world,
there was an incredible framework
for writing GUI-based apps on the early versions of the Mac.
And it's called HyperCard.
And the concept is very easy to explain.
The user interface is just made of a stack of cards.
And there is always one card being displayed at once.
And you interact with that card.
So there might be a button or there might be some text or a link or a picture or a movie
But when you interact with that it transitions you to another card
So it's a little bit like you know
Again from a similar vintage that those choose your own adventure games where you know
If you want to kill troll turn to page 291 if you want to run away turn to page 32
So you transition to a new state?
That's a new card or a new piece of text in the adventure game as it were and so on and so forth
Okay, it's really easy to explain that to 11 year olds. Okay
Um, and so we took that piper card model and we created something, that we demoed at PyCon.
Um that allows you to essentially, uh build apps on top of PyScript using these concepts, okay
um
I'm, not sure whether these will work still
The auto advance one works you just have to have patience because it takes 10 seconds to auto advance
Yeah, okay. So that so these demos allow me to um
You know exercise different aspects of the underlying browser and how that interacts with python and things
But what we've done is we've renamed it from hyper card because that has a legacy people think it's going to be hyper card
When in fact, it's not hyper card. It's actually python the browser, but we use that card like
Metaphor, but there are other things that we kind of we want to build into that. So right now literally this is what I do
Uh in my day is i'm thinking very hard and writing. the first
Draft of what invents this framework will be so that it makes it easy for people to create.
user interface led
Applications using python and pyscript in the browser
Wherever the browser may be on your tesla on your mobile phone on your tablet on your desktop. It'll all look the same
um now
i've been working at perhaps the python end of things, but another aspect of this is that we want to
Um, make sure that we create a development environment that will probably end up in in
Pyscrite.com that will allow beginner coders in the same way that you know
My work on mu tries to give you a code editor
that's not as complicated as a Visual Studio code,
but it lets you get to the good stuff as quickly as possible.
So it is a similar sort of philosophy,
will allow you to draw your user interface,
allow you to create the logic that you need
to make your app run without actually even realizing
that under the hood you've got Python running as well.
- So we should see PiperCard as kind of a proof of concept,
and then you're coming out with this, you called it Invent?
Invent so you literally import invent and then import app or import dot whatever. Yeah
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
The day over here in the uk
But i'll i'll say one thing to you. Nicholas. Actually i'm a little disappointed
To be honest that i'm the only one that actually is dogfooding
Pipe and writing my talks with invent and all of those, right? Yeah
- Yeah.
- You should be.
- For Python.
- Hey, it's great.
I've been using actually Visual, PyScript,
and then Invent, et cetera, for my talk.
And I was expecting you would say like, yeah, me too.
You're like, oh, really?
Really brave, really brave of you.
- Just left you hanging dry.
- Yeah, yeah.
I have a bang to rights.
He's got me bang to rights.
But honestly, one thing that I didn't think before,
while in the Uber to the conference,
the day before my, no, actually the day of my talk,
the ability to actually check my slides
and change them on the backseat of a car,
on my phone, was mind-blowing and really cool, right?
Which is, it helps to the power of the framework itself.
Yeah, kudos.
- So you've told a really good story here,
because now imagine that you are in a classroom in,
I don't know, I'm just picking random country, in Mexico.
Okay, and you've got a class where there are kids
with Chromebooks, okay?
Getting Python on there,
getting any app to be built on those is difficult enough,
but with PyScripts, it's gonna be so much easier
to sort of story to do that sort of thing.
So that's, we're working hard on that
It's gonna be a long journey, but we're confident
that it'll produce good results.
- Do you have some dreams or have you thought about
Git and GitHub integration into pyscript.com?
Like if I had a pyscript.com thing and a GitHub repo,
could I have one mirror the other
so that I could do GitHub-like things to it?
- Yeah, go ahead, Nikos.
I was just gonna say I I look forward to the uh the feature request on our
Our repository
You know, we're listening to the community if that's something that you want
Tell us about it. Yeah that actually I would love to hear more about how would you people would envision it like
so we already kind of already have it, uh in the sense that
uh
people working on
both PyScript.com but also the open source project.
We have a CLI for both.
And the CLI on the open source site
allows you to create new projects with a template
to run them locally and those type of things.
We have a plugin for that CLI that
is a PyScript.com plugin that allows you to log in, log out,
and then basically have a local copy
version of your project that is in .com.
And one of the first scenarios that we're thinking was,
as a developer, probably not as a non-technical user,
but as a developer, I want to use GitHub for my version control things,
and I want to use PyScript.com to deploy and change things.
So we do have a minimal integration.
We're going to be announcing and properly announcing
and releasing those things in a month time frame.
But that is one of the most important use cases that we have.
Take my thoughts for what they are,
is very loosely informed, not a lot of skin in the game,
but with my website, my personal website,
I use Hugo and then I just push to a branch
that triggers a deploy on Netlify.
There's the Heroku type thing.
It'd be cool if it kind of just like,
if it goes to this branch, that's what's on PyScript.com.
That's what I would love if I were doing that integration
and using it, but.
- Yeah, yeah.
That's one use cases.
I think interesting that you mentioned,
we've been looking at Heroku as well, et cetera.
The kind of difficulty here is we're often used
to a one repo, one app type of separation,
but you may have like a one repo where let's say
you collect all your talks over,
that you give around conferences.
And you may wanna have a folder
and each folder is one app on pyscript.com.
Then how do we support those different workflows?
That's the type of thing I'm thinking right now.
- Sure, well, people who are using it,
reach out to these guys and give me your thoughts here.
- Thank you.
- All right, we're getting, of course,
yeah, we're getting short on time.
So maybe the last thing we should talk about
is kind of PyScript Next.
I wonder where are we going from here, folks?
- Yes, so let me introduce this real quick.
And I think you should have like a link to--
- I have a bunch of tabs open.
- That one, perfect.
So what's PyScript Next?
It's, as I said, like we're rewriting PyScript
with a smaller core, more flexible, web native, et cetera,
to allow different things.
So this tech preview that we're formally launching next week.
So you all listening, it was top first and top five.
- Awesome, I'm sure the release was amazing
and it went really well, so perfect.
Congratulations.
(laughing)
- That's very Doctor Who of you to say that.
- But the gist of it is that we rethought
a lot of the core concepts and now we're able to allow
allow multiple interpreters. We have MicroPython by default, supported by default. All of the
interpreters support execution on the main thread, just like the previous version of PyScript.
But now also we support on a worker, a web worker, which means you can run Python
while the web is loading or while the page is doing other things.
It's like there's another process or the processes in your page.
That's one of the basic web workers.
Yes.
Right.
That's been a big part of WebAssembly for quite a while, but you all haven't leveraged
that previously, right?
Yes.
And it was very painful for us because, you know, for instance, Fano, an internal project
of Anaconda, like they have all the examples ported to the web with Pyodide.
because we didn't support workers yet,
it was better for them to just use PyDi directly.
Now, we can allow them to use
PyScript and do all those things.
We saw actually a tech preview of even Django
or FastAPI running on PyScript with workers,
which is extremely cool.
It's hard to actually imagine,
But even just the educational purpose of this,
you can have live running examples in your docs
and you can just play with that, which is interesting.
- Well, I don't know how well
PyScript plugs into this world,
but there is an entire ecosystem
that I don't operate very much in,
but where if you have WebAssembly,
you can run it kind of like
Node can run JavaScript on a server.
You can run WebAssembly stuff in the cloud on a server
in a container, you can run it directly.
So in those scenarios, it makes tons of sense to say,
we're going to use PyScript to host FastAPI.
And it has a meaning, right?
It's not just browsers all the way down or something, right?
It has a purpose for being there.
Yeah, yeah.
And well, I wish we had more time.
There's a lot going on in WebAssembly ecosystem
as well to support this as well, which is cool.
But just for the interest of time, this next branch as well,
it also supports communication between workers and the main thread and vice versa.
And we can have multiple interpreters.
Maybe one is Pyodide, another is Python, another is Lua.
And we have examples of those that can communicate between each other.
If you click on All Together, I think that's the one where they're all together.
All the interpreters to get no it's not that one. I know it's this one you can but you need to open the console
Uh, no, is it that one i'm not sure it is
Oh, right, yes, not this one. I think it's if you go back it might be the worker one, um
at the bottom
Worker try that
Yeah, okay. So you've got javascript
Starting micropython in a web worker
Okay
and then micropython
Saying hello back to javascript, but at the same time micropython on the main thread has actually started in a web worker a lua
interpreter and lua
Is saying back to the main thread to micropython. Hi micropython and then you've got micropython
starting cpython
on a web worker
And then when c python has loaded and everything back to the micropython context, you know, hello micropython this, you know
Can you imagine?
well, I can actually because I used to do some work for the uk government and I was on a data platform and
The civil servants who were doing all the stats work in the ministry of justice were using our platform
And they would like they would want data where they would
they wanted to grab data, then run it through some R thing, and then run it through some Python thing,
and then stick it on a browser, you know, on a website somewhere, so some minister or a high
fluting civil servant can go and have a look at the graph of, I don't know, COVID, the spread of
COVID through the UK prison system or something like that. Yeah, well, you can do that all in a
single browser. The amount of stand on one leg, stick your finger in your ear and whistle, God
God save the king backwards you needed to get that to work was you know
It took them weeks to just get their development environment set up with web workers
We've and the multiple run times kind of got that as a solution here now as well
actually
the
The speed of loading speed like you didn't we didn't have yeah
Loading screen we didn't have like actually if you check the network
Let me try the the magic lot live. Yeah, Oh
Microphone just my microphone see how fast that's that brings you up
This one. Yeah
There we go. I mean, it's like
instant
Yeah, it is instant it's amazing yeah, I'm once it's cashed it's
You know
Yeah, it's this kind of stuff that I'm thinking like then the front-end framework type of story starts to become completely realistic
- Realistic.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
Actually, the last one that I wanted to show
actually is the next tab that you have, I think,
which is, there you go.
Can you open the console as well?
- I'm gonna use my little hotkey thing here,
my little, it's like a hotkey you can do
to open those things, anyway.
Yeah, okay.
- So if you go to console, actually,
just to show the results.
- Yeah. - Perfect.
So this example is actually having,
it's a Python input keyword,
stopping its execution, waiting for an answer.
So it's actually blocking calls.
- You're good at it, Matt, seven.
- Right, so but if you add it--
- No, no, no, no, no, that's the JavaScript console.
You wanna type seven into the input.
- The inputs, yes.
- Okay.
So basically, what's happening is it's blocking
and then waiting for its call while the page is still
responsive and everything else.
And then when you answer, it executes.
That is huge because that unlocks a lot of use cases.
Debugger, for instance, we can have a breakpoint somewhere,
and you can go and debug your code.
And a lot of scenarios that were not working before
can work now.
So this is very exciting.
Yeah, there's a lot of kind of under the hood stuff
that has changed that enables us to do some really cool things
now.
Yeah, excellent.
So with the web workers, do I get async and await?
Yes, yeah, and proper async and await, yes.
That's fantastic.
OK, I love it.
All right, guys, what else?
What final things do you want to tell people
Before we wrap up this pi script update episode
I've got two things
First one is if you want to play if you want to have a look around
Uh pi script.com is the place to just get your hands dirty and our colleagues who work on that
I've done an amazing job and uh the feedback that you can give them
Through the form that you'll find on the website is is read and we care very deeply about you know
The experience that users have and suggestions and things so knock yourself out go and go and do that
And the second thing I want to say is that pyscrit is open source software. So I know
Fabio and myself are employed by anaconda, but we have contributors who are not anaconda employees and you know
We would love the community to to come with us on this journey. tell us, you know what you want
Build a framework on top of pi script build plugins on top of pi script create a goofy app on top of pi script
You know put it on your tesla or whatever, you know, I don't know
I would love it would make my day if before the end of the year somebody's gone. Hey
I've built a death star using pi script or some ridiculous project or whatever and you know, I go wow
Like I said, I never thought someone would do that. that's that's be playful explore be creative have fun
That's what we want to see.
That's what I want to see.
I don't know, Fabio, how about you?
- Yeah, I would actually just double down what you said
and actually encourage everyone to reach out.
We're trying to make it a good tool
for anyone to learn programming
or to share your things, et cetera.
And a lot of the difficulties we have all the time
is trying to think with new users' brain
or students' brain and people with different backgrounds
because unfortunately or fortunately,
we've been in this game for 20 years, right?
So it's really hard.
So when we say, "Reach out, we need you,"
we really mean it.
Like, I think, I strongly believe
that all open source projects are about people
and benefit from the diversity, right?
Like good docs are made by non-developers.
Good content is made by people that have passion
for hopping on a video and talking about stuff.
Like I just, I'm trying to convince my daughter
to have like a PyScript channel on TikTok, you know,
just to talk. - That'd be cool, yeah.
- Right, to talk the lingo.
So we really value you reaching out
and coming and helping us to be more human as a project.
And the second thing is really help us spread the word
and make it popular so that we can make Python
even more popular and help people,
which I think in this age where we have AI
and big tech companies and algorithms and all of that,
giving power to people to just run a programming language
on their machines and the distributed nature of PyScript,
I think it's important today.
So yeah, that's all I wanted to say.
- Yeah, excellent.
Maybe a quick final question.
Marwan says, "Any work on the HTML canvas via PyScript?
"Thinking of simple stuff like creating a snake game."
- Okay, Marwan, import JS.
Now you have global this, okay?
Now you have access to your canvas
And it's the same API because we're proxying the JavaScript objects
as you'll find on like the Mozilla developer docs.
So go knock yourself out.
Awesome. Yeah, that's what I imagine.
MDN network, not W3Schools, if you can choose.
Yes, yes.
I'm also working on a higher level web API for PyScript,
which will help with that as well,
make it the API more Pythonic,
but what Nicol said is available today
and you can just, you know.
- Yeah, you get to reuse your JavaScript skills
if you have them.
- Yeah, it's the same API.
It's the same API.
- Yeah.
All right, guys.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you for this project.
It's really, really exciting
and I look forward to catching up again
and seeing what else you've built in six months,
year whenever it turns out to be.
- Yes.
And thank you Michael for this and running the show.
This is always a great fun.
Thank you.
- Yes, thank you.
- Yeah, you bet.
Bye.